Who's there?
Nay, answer me: stand, and unfold yourself.
Long live the king!
Bernardo?
He.
You come most carefully upon your hour.
'Tis now struck twelve; get thee to bed, Francisco.
For this relief much thanks.
'Tis bitter cold, And I am sick at heart.
Have you had quiet guard?
Not a mouse stirring.
Well, good night.
If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,
The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.
I think I hear them.
Stand, ho!
Who's there?
Friends to this ground.
And liegemen to the Dane.
Give you good night.
Farewell, honest soldier.
Who hath relieved you?
Bernardo hath my place.
Give you good night.
Who are! Bernardo!
Say.
What, is Horatio there?
A piece of him.
Welcome, Horatio: welcome, good Marcellus.
What, has this thing appear'd again to-night?
I have seen nothing.
Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy,
And will not let belief take hold of him
Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us.
Therefore I have entreated him along with us
to watch the minutes of this night;
That if again this apparition come,
He may approve our eyes and speak to it.
Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.
Sit down awhile;
And let us once again assail your ears
That are so fortified against our story
What we have two nights seen.
Well, sit we down,
And let us hear Bernardo speak of this.
Last night of all,
When yond same star that's westward from the pole
Had made his course to illume that part of heaven
Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,
The bell then beating one--
Peace, break thee off; look, where it comes again!
In the same figure like the king that's dead.
Thou art a scholar; speak to it, Horatio.
Looks it not like the king?
Mark it, Horatio.
Most like: it harrows me with fear and wonder.
It would be spoke to.
Question it, Horatio.
What art thou that usurp'st this time of night,
Together with that fair and warlike form
In which the majesty of buried Denmark did sometimes march?
By heaven I charge thee, speak!
It is offended.
See, it stalks away!
Stay!
Speak, speak!
I charge thee, speak!
'Tis gone and will not answer.
How now, Horatio!
You tremble and look pale.
Is not this something more than fantasy?
What think you on't?
Before my God, I might not this believe
Without the sensible and true avouch of mine own eyes.
Is it not like the king?
As thou art to thyself:
Such was the very armour he had on
When he the ambitious Norway combated;
So frown'd he once, when, in an angry parle,
He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.
'Tis strange.
Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.
In what particular thought to work...
I know not;
But in the gross and scope of mine opinion,
This bodes some strange eruption to our state.
Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,
Why this same strict and most observant watch
So nightly toils the subject of the land,
And why such daily cast of brazen cannon,
And foreign mart for implements of war;
Who is it that can inform me?
That can I; At least, the whisper goes so.
Our last king,
Whose image even but now appear'd to us,
Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,
Thereto prick'd on by a most emulate pride,
Dared to the combat; in the which our valiant Hamlet--
For so this side of our known world esteem'd him--
Did slay this Fortinbras; who by a seal'd compact,
Well ratified by law and heraldry,
Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror.
Now, sir, young Fortinbras,
Of unimproved mettle hot and full,
Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there
Shark'd up a list of lawless resolutes,
For food and diet,
to some enterprise That hath a stomach in't;
which is none other--
As it doth well appear unto our state--
But to recover of us
by strong hand And terms compulsatory
those foresaid lands So by his father lost.
And this, I take it, Is the main motive
of our preparation.
I think it be no other but e'en so:
Well may it sort that this portentous figure
Comes armed through our watch;
so like the king That was and is
the question of these wars.
But soft, behold! where it comes again!
I'll cross it, though it blast me.
Stay, illusion!
If thou hast any sound or use of voice,
Speak to me:
If there be any good thing to be done
That may to thee do ease or grace to me, Speak to me.
If thou art privy to thy country's fate,
Which, happily, foreknowing may avoid, O, speak!
Stop it, Marcellus.
Shall I strike at it with my partisan?
I do, if it will not stand.
'Tis here!
'Tis gone!
We do it wrong, being so majestical,
To offer it the show of violence;
For it is, as the air, invulnerable,
And our vain blows malicious mockery.
It was about to speak when the cock crew.
And then it started like a guilty thing
Upon a fearful summons.
I have heard, The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
Awake the god of day; and, at his warning,
Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
The extravagant and erring spirit
hies To his confine: and of the truth herein
This present object made probation.
It faded on the crowing of the cock.
Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes
Wherein our Saviour's birth is celebrated,
This bird of dawning singeth all night long:
And then, they say, no spirit dares stir abroad;
The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike,
No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
So hallow'd and so gracious is that time.
So have I heard and do in part believe it.
But, look, the morn, in russet mantle clad,
Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill:
Break we our watch up; and by my advice,
Let us impart what we have seen to-night Unto young Hamlet;
for, upon my life, This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
Let's do it, I pray; and I this morning know
Where we shall find him most convenient.
Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death
The memory be green and that it us befitted
To bear our hearts in grief and our whole kingdom
To be contracted in one brow of woe.
Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature
That we with wisest sorrow think on him,
Together with remembrance of ourselves.
Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,
The imperial jointress to this warlike state,
Have we, as 'twere with a defeated joy--
With one auspicious and one dropping eye,
With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage,
In equal scale weighing delight and dole--
Taken to wife:
nor have we herein barr'd Your better wisdoms,
which have freely gone With this affair along.
For all, our thanks.
Now follows, that you know, young Fortinbras,
Holding a weak supposal of our worth,
Or thinking by our late dear brother's death
Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,
He hath not fail'd to pester us with message,
Importing the surrender of those lands
Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,
To our most valiant brother.
So much for him.
Now for ourself and for this time of meeting:
Thus much the business is: we have here writ To Norway,
uncle of young Fortinbras-- Who, impotent and bed-rid,
scarcely hears Of this his nephew's purpose--
to suppress His further gait herein;
in that the levies, The lists and full proportions
are all made Out of his subject:
and we here dispatch You, good Cornelius,
and you, Voltemand,
For bearers of this greeting to old Norway;
Giving to you no further personal power
To business with the king
more than the scope Of these delated articles allow.
Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.
In that and all things will we show our duty.
We doubt it nothing: heartily farewell.
And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?
You told us of some suit; what is't, Laertes?
You cannot speak of reason to the Dane
And loose your voice: what wouldst thou beg, Laertes,
That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
The head is not more native to the heart,
The hand more instrumental to the mouth,
Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
What wouldst thou have, Laertes?
My dread lord, Your leave and favour to return to France;
From whence though willingly I came to Denmark
To show my duty in your coronation,
Yet now, I must confess, that duty done,
My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France
And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.
Have you your father's leave?
What says Polonius?
He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave
By laboursome petition, and at last Upon his will
I seal'd my hard consent:
I do beseech you, give him leave to go.
Take thy fair hour, Laertes; time be thine,
And thy best graces spend it at thy will.
But now, my cousin Hamlet and my son--
A little more than kin and less than kind.
How is it that the clouds still hang on you?
Not so, my lord; I am too much in the sun.
Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off,
And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.
Do not forever with thy vailed lids
Seek for thy noble father in the dust:
Thou know'st 'tis common; all that live must die,
Passing through nature to eternity.
Ay, madam, it is common.
If it be, Why seems it so particular with thee?
Seems, madam!
Nay, it is; I know not "seems."
'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
Nor customary suits of solemn black,
Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,
No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
Nor the dejected 'havior of the visage,
Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief
That can denote me truly: these indeed seem
For they are actions that a man might play:
But I have that within which passes show;
These but the trappings and the suits of woe.
'Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet,
To give these mourning duties to your father:
But, you must know, your father lost a father;
That father lost, lost his,
and the survivor bound In filial obligation
for some term To do obsequious sorrow:
but to persever In obstinate condolement
is a course Of impious stubbornness;
'tis unmanly grief;
It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,
A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,
An understanding simple and unschool'd:
For what we know must be
and is as common As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
Why should we in our peevish opposition
Take it to heart?
Fie!
'Tis a fault to heaven, A fault against the dead,
a fault to nature, To reason most absurd
whose common theme Is death of fathers.
We pray you, throw to earth This unprevailing woe,
and think of us As of a father:
for let the world take note,
You are the most immediate to our throne;
And with no less nobility of love
Than that which dearest father bears his son
Do I impart toward you.
For your intent In going back to school in Wittenberg,
It is most retrograde to our desires:
And we beseech you, bend you to remain Here,
in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.
Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet:
I pray thee, stay with us; go not to Wittenberg.
I shall in all my best obey you, madam.
Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply:
Be as ourself in Denmark.
Madam, come; This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet
Sits smiling to my heart: in grace whereof,
No jocund health that Denmark drinks to-day,
But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
And the king's rouse the heavens all bruit again,
Re-speaking earthly thunder.
Come away.
O, that this too too solid flesh would melt
Thaw and resolve itself into a dew!
Or that the Everlasting had not fix'd His cannon
'gainst self-slaughter!
O God!
God!
How weary, stale, flat and unprofitable
Seem to me all the uses of this world!
Fie on't! O, fie!
'Tis an unweeded garden, That grows to seed.
Things rank and gross in nature Possess it merely.
That it should come to this!
But two months dead: nay, not so much, not two:
So excellent a king;
that was, to this, Hyperion to a satyr;
so loving to my mother
That he might not beteem the winds of heaven
Visit her face too roughly.
Heaven and earth! Must I remember?
Why, she would hang on him,
As if increase of appetite had grown By what it fed on:
and yet, within a month-- Let me not think on't.
Frailty, thy name is woman!
A little month, or ere those shoes were old
With which she follow'd my poor father's body
Like Niobe, all tears.
Why she, even she-- O, God!
A beast, that wants discourse of reason
Would have mourn'd longer--
married with my uncle, My father's brother,
but no more like my father Than I to Hercules.
Within a month.
Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
Hath left the flushing in her galled eyes, She married.
O, most wicked speed,
to post With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!
It is not nor it cannot come to good:
But break, my heart; for I must hold my tongue.
Hail to your lordship!
I'm glad to see thee well.
Horatio.
I do forget myself.
The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.
Sir, my good friend;
I'll change that name with you:
And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?
Marcellus?
My good lord.
I am very glad to see you.
Good even, sir.
What, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?
A truant disposition, good my lord.
I would not hear your enemy say so.
I know you are no truant.
But what is your affair in Elsinore?
We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.
My lord, I came to see your father's funeral.
I pray thee, do not mock me, fellow-student;
I think it was to see my mother's wedding.
Indeed, my lord, it follow'd hard upon.
Thrift, thrift, Horatio!
The funeral baked meats
Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven
Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!
My father!
Methinks I see my father.
Where, my lord?
In my mind's eye, Horatio.
I saw him once; he was a goodly king.
He was a man, take him for all in all,
I shall not look upon his like again.
My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.
Saw who?
My lord, the king your father.
The king my father!
Season your admiration for awhile With an attent ear
till I may deliver,
Upon the witness of these gentlemen,
This marvel to you.
For God's love, let me hear.
Two nights together had these gentlemen,
Marcellus and Bernardo, on their watch
In the dead waste and middle of the night
Been thus encounter'd.
A figure like your father, Armed at point exactly,
cap-a-pe, Appears before them,
and with solemn march Goes slow and stately by them.
Thrice he walk'd
By their oppress'd and fear-surprised eyes
Within his truncheon's length; whilst they,
distilled Almost to jelly with the act of fear,
Stand dumb and speak not to him.
This to me In dreadful secrecy impart they did;
And I with them the third night kept the watch;
Where, as they had deliver'd, both in time, Form of the thing,
each word made true and good, The apparition comes:
I knew your father; These hands are not more like.
But where was this?
My lord, upon the platform where we watch'd.
Did you not speak to it?
My lord, I did; But answer made it none.
Yet once methought It lifted up its head
and did address Itself to motion,
like it would speak;
But even then the morning cock crew loud,
And at its sound it shrunk in haste away,
And vanish'd from our sight.
'Tis very strange.
As I do live, my honour'd lord, 'tis true;
And we did think it writ down in our duty
To let you know of it.
Indeed, indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.
Hold you the watch to-night?
We do, my lord.
Arm'd, you say?
Arm'd, my lord.
From top to toe?
My lord, from head to foot.
Then saw you not his face?
O, yes, my lord; he wore his beaver up.
What look'd he? Frowningly?
A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.
Pale or red?
Nay, very pale.
And fix'd his eyes upon you?
Most constantly.
I would had I been there.
It would have much amazed you.
Very like, very like.
Stay'd it long?
While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.
Longer.
Not when I saw't.
His beard was grizzled--no?
It was as I have seen it in his life, A sable silver'd.
I will watch to-night; Perchance 'twill walk again.
I warrant it will.
If it assume my noble father's person,
I'll speak to it,
though hell itself should gape And bid me hold my peace.
I pray you all,
If you have hitherto conceal'd this sight,
Let it be tenable in your silence still;
And whatsoever else shall hap to-night,
Give it an understanding, but no tongue:
I will requite your loves.
So, fare you well:
Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,
I'll visit you.
Our duty to your honour.
Your loves, as mine to you: farewell.
My father's spirit in arms!
All is not well; I doubt some foul play:
O, would the night were come!
Till then sit still, my soul:
foul deeds will rise,
Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's eyes.
My necessaries are embark'd.
Farewell.
And, sister, as the winds give benefit
And convoy is assistant, do not sleep,
But let me hear from you.
Do you doubt that?
For Hamlet and the trifling of his favour,
Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood,
A violet in the youth of primy nature,
Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting,
The perfume and suppliance of a minute; No more.
No more but so?
Think it no more.
Perhaps he loves you now, but you must fear,
His greatness weigh'd, his will is not his own;
For he himself is subject to his birth:
He may not, as unvalued persons do,
Carve for himself;
for on his choice depends The sanity and health
of this whole state; And therefore must his choice be
circumscribed Unto the voice and yielding of that body
Whereof he is the head.
Then if he says he loves you,
It fits your wisdom so far to believe it
As he in his particular act and place
May give his saying deed; which is no further
Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.
Then weigh what loss your honour may sustain,
If with too credent ear you list his songs,
Or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure
open To his unmaster'd importunity.
Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister,
And keep you in the rear of your affection,
Out of the shot and danger of desire.
I shall the effect of this good lesson keep,
As watchman to my heart.
But, good my brother, Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,
Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven;
Whiles, like a puff'd and reckless libertine,
Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads,
And recks not his own rede.
O, fear me not.
Yet here, Laertes!
Aboard, aboard, for shame!
The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
And you are stay'd for.
There; my blessing with thee!
And these few precepts in thy memory look thou character.
Give thy thoughts no tongue,
Nor any unproportioned thought his act.
Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.
Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
Grapple them to thy soul with hoops of steel;
But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
Of each new-hatch'd, unfledged courage.
Beware Of entrance to a quarrel, but being in,
Bear't that the opposed may beware of thee.
Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice;
Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment.
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,
But not express'd in fancy; rich, not gaudy;
For the apparel oft proclaims the man,
And they in France of the best rank and station
Are of a most select and generous choice in that.
Neither a borrower nor a lender be;
For loan oft loses both itself and friend,
And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
This above all: to thine ownself be true,
And it must follow, as the night the day,
Thou canst not then be false to any man.
Farewell: my blessing season this in thee!
Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.
The time invites you; go; your servants tend.
Farewell, Ophelia;
and remember well What I have said to you.
'Tis in my memory lock'd,
And you yourself shall keep the key of it.
Farewell.
What is't, Ophelia, he hath said to you?
So please you,
something touching the Lord Hamlet.
Marry, well bethought:
'Tis told me, he hath very oft of late
Given private time to you;
and you yourself Have of your audience
been most free and bounteous.
What is between you? Hmm?
Give me up the truth.
He hath, my lord,
of late made many tenders Of his affection to me.
Affection!
Pooh!
You speak like a green girl,
Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
Do you believe his tenders, as you call them?
I do not know, my lord, what I should think.
Marry, I shall teach you: think yourself a baby;
That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,
Which are not sterling.
Tender yourself more dearly;
Or--not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
Running it thus-- you'll tender me a fool.
My lord, he hath importuned me with love In honourable fashion.
Ay, fashion you may call it; go to, go to.
And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,
With almost all the holy vows of heaven.
Ay, springes to catch woodcocks.
I do know, When the blood burns,
how prodigal the soul Lends the tongue vows:
these blazes, daughter, Giving more light than heat,
extinct in both, Even in their promise,
as they are a-making, You must not take for fire.
In few, Ophelia, Do not believe his vows;
Now, this is for all: I would not, in plain terms,
from this time forth,
Have you so slander any moment's leisure,
As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.
Look to't, I charge you.
Come your ways.
I shall obey, my lord.
The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.
It is a nipping and an eager air.
What hour now?
I think it lacks of twelve.
No, it is struck.
Indeed? I heard it not:
Then draws near the season
Wherein the spirit held its wont to walk.
What does this mean, my lord?
The king doth wake to-night and takes his rouse,
Keeps wassail, and the swaggering up-spring reels;
And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,
The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out
The triumph of his pledge.
Is it a custom?
Ay, marry, is't: But to my mind,
though I am native here And to the manner born,
it is a custom More honour'd
in the breach than the observance.
This heavy-headed revel east and west
Makes us traduced and tax'd of other nations:
They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase
Soil our addition;
and indeed it takes From our achievements,
though perform'd at height,
The pith and marrow of our attribute.
So, oft it chances in particular men,
That for some vicious mole of nature in them,
As in their birth-- wherein they are not guilty,
Since nature cannot choose his origin--
By the o'ergrowth of some complexion,
Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason,
Or by some habit
that too much o'er-leavens the form of plausive manners.
That these men, Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,
Being nature's livery, or fortune's star--
his virtues else-- be they as pure as grace,
As infinite as man may undergo-- Shall in the general censure
take corruption From that particular fault.
Look, my lord, it comes!
Angels and ministers of grace defend us!
Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damn'd,
Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell,
Be thy intents wicked or charitable,
Thou comest in such a questionable shape
That I will speak with thee:
I'll call thee Hamlet, King, father, royal Dane:
O, answer me!
Let me not burst in ignorance
but tell Why thy canonized bones,
hearsed in death, Have burst their cerements;
why the sepulchre
Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn'd
Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws
To cast thee up again.
What may this mean, That thou, dead corse,
again in complete steel Revisit'st thus
the glimpses of the moon, Making night hideous;
and we fools of nature
So horridly to shake our dispositions
With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
Say, why is this?
Wherefore?
What should we do?
It beckons you to go away with it,
As if it some impartment did desire with you alone.
Look, with what courteous action It waved you
to a more removed ground: But do not go with it.
By no means, my lord.
It will not speak; then I will follow it.
Do not, my lord.
Why, what should be the fear?
I do not set my life in a pin's fee;
And for my soul, what can it do to that,
Being a thing immortal as itself?
It waves me forth again: I'll follow it.
What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord,
Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
That beetles o'er his base into the sea
And there assume some other horrible form
Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason
And draw you into madness?
Think of it.
It waves me still.
Go on; I'll follow thee.
You shall not go, my lord.
Hold off your hands.
Be ruled; you shall not.
My fate cries out, And makes each petty artery in this body
As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve!
Still am I call'd.
Unhand me, gentlemen.
By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him that lets me!
I say, away!
Go on; I'll follow thee.
He waxes desperate with imagination.
Let's follow him; 'tis not fit thus to obey him.
I have after.
To what issue will this come?
Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.
Heaven will direct it.
Nay, let's follow him.
Where wilt thou lead me?
Speak;
I'll go no further.
Mark me.
I will.
My hour is almost come,
When I to sulphurous and tormenting flames
Must render up myself.
Alas, poor ghost!
Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
To what I shall unfold.
Speak; I am bound to hear.
So art thou to revenge when thou shalt hear.
What?
I am thy father's spirit,
Doom'd for a certain term to walk the night,
And for the day confined to fast in fires,
Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature
Are burnt and purged away.
But that I am forbid To tell the secrets of my prison-house,
I could a tale unfold whose lightest word
Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres,
Thy knotted and combined locks to part
And each particular hair to stand on end,
Like quills upon the fretful porpentine.
But this eternal blazon must not be
To ears of flesh and blood.
List, list, O, list!
If thou didst ever thy dear father love--
O God!
Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.
Murder!
Murder most foul, as in the best it is;
But this most foul, strange and unnatural.
Haste me to know't, that I,
with wings as swift As meditation
or the thoughts of love, May sweep to my revenge.
I find thee apt;
And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed
That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,
Wouldst thou not stir in this.
Now, Hamlet, hear:
'Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,
A serpent stung me; so the whole ear of Denmark
Is by a forged process of my death Rankly abused.
But know, thou noble youth,
The serpent that did sting thy father's life
Now wears his crown.
O my prophetic soul!
My uncle!
Nay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,
With witchcraft of his wits, with traitorous gifts--
O wicked wit and gifts,
that have the power So to seduce!
Won to his shameful lust
The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen:
O Hamlet, what a falling-off was there!
From me, whose love was of that dignity
That it went hand in hand
even with the vow I made to her in marriage,
and to decline Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor
To those of mine!
But virtue, as it never will be moved,
Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,
So lust, though to a radiant angel link'd,
Will sate itself in a celestial bed
And prey on garbage.
But, soft!
Methinks I scent the morning air;
Brief let me be.
Sleeping within my orchard,
My custom always of the afternoon,
Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole
With juice of cursed hebona in a vial,
And in the porches of my ears
did pour The leperous distilment;
whose effect Holds such an enmity
with blood of man That swift as quicksilver
it courses through The natural gates and alleys of the body,
And with a sudden vigour it doth posset And curd,
like eager droppings into milk, The thin and wholesome blood:
so did it mine;
And a most instant tetter bark'd about, Most lazar-like,
with vile and loathsome crust, All my smooth body.
Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand Of life,
of crown, of queen, at once dispatch'd.
Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin,
Unhousel'd, disappointed, unanel'd, No reckoning made,
but sent to my account
With all my imperfections on my head.
O, horrible!
Most horrible!
If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not;
Let not the royal bed of Denmark
be a couch for luxury and damned incest.
But, howsomever thou pursuest this act, Taint not thy mind,
nor let thy soul contrive Against thy mother aught:
leave her to heaven And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge,
To prick and sting her.
Fare thee well at once!
The glow-worm shows the matin to be near,
And 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire:
Adieu.
Adieu, adieu.
Remember me.
O you host of heaven!
O earth!
What else?
And shall I couple hell?
Fie! Fie!
Hold, hold, my heart;
And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,
But bear me stiffly up.
Remember thee!
Ay, thou poor ghost,
whilst memory holds a seat In this distracted globe.
Remember thee!
Yea, from the table of my memory
I'll wipe away all trivial fond records, All saws of books,
all forms, all pressures past,
That youth and observation copied there;
And thy commandment all alone shall live
Within the book and volume of my brain,
Unmix'd with baser matter.
Yes, yes, by heaven!
O most pernicious woman!
O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!
My tables, my tables.
Meet it as I set it down,
That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain;
At least I'm sure it may be so in Denmark:
So, uncle, there you are.
Now to my word; It is Adieu, adieu!
Remember me.
I have sworn it.
My lord.
My lord?
Lord Hamlet?
Heaven secure him!
So be it!
Hello, ho, ho, my lord!
Hello, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho!
Come, bird, come.
How is't, my noble lord?
What news, my lord?
O, wonderful!
Good my lord, tell it.
No.
You will reveal it.
My lord, by heaven.
Nor I, my lord.
How say you, then; would heart of man once think it?
But you'll be secret?
Ay, by heaven, my lord.
There's ne'er a villain dwelling in all Denmark
But he's an arrant knave.
There needs no ghost, my lord,
come from the grave To tell us this.
Why, right; you are in the right;
And so, without more circumstance at all,
I hold it fit that we shake hands and part:
You, as your business and desire shall point you;
For every man hath business and desire, Such as it is;
and for mine own poor part, Look you, I'll go pray.
These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.
I'm sorry they offend you, heartily; Yes, faith heartily.
There's no offence, my lord.
Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,
And much offence too.
Touching this vision here, It is an honest ghost,
that let me tell you:
For your desire to know what is between us,
O'ermaster it as you may.
And now, good friends,
As you are friends, scholars and soldiers,
Give me one poor request.
What is't, my lord? We will.
Never make known what you have seen to-night.
My lord, we will not.
Nay, but swear't.
In faith, My lord, not I.
Nor I, my lord, in faith.
Upon my sword.
We have sworn, my lord, already.
Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.
Swear.
Ah, ha, boy!
Say'st thou so?
Art thou there, truepenny?
Come on.
You hear this fellow in the cellarage.
Consent to swear.
Propose the oath, my lord.
Never to speak of this that you have seen,
Swear by my sword.
Swear.
Hic et ubique?
Then we'll shift our ground.
Come hither, gentlemen, And lay your hands again upon my sword.
Swear by my sword never to speak of this
that you have heard.
Swear by his sword.
Well said, old mole!
Canst work in the earth so fast?
A worthy pioner!
Once more remove, good friends.
O day and night, but this is wondrous strange!
And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy.
But come; Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,
How strange or odd soe'er I bear myself,
As I perchance hereafter shall think meet
To put an antic disposition on, That you,
at such times seeing me, ne'er shall,
With arms encumber'd thus, or this headshake
Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,
As "Well, well, we know," or "We would, an' if we could,"
Or "If we list to speak," or "There be, an' if they might,"
Or such ambiguous giving out,
to note That you know aught of me: this do swear,
So grace and mercy at your most need help you.
Swear.
Rest, rest, perturbed spirit!
So, gentlemen, with all my love I do commend me to you.
Let us go in together;
And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.
The time is out of joint: O cursed spite,
That ever I was born to set it right.
Nay, come, let's go together.
Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.
I will, my lord.
You shall do marvellous wisely, good Reynaldo,
Before you visit him, to make inquire Of his behavior.